Updated: 6/28/2024

Money Games Series
I. Money Games
II. The Machine
III. New Millenium Homes
IV. Just


Platforms:
ethpapers.xyz => https://mirror.xyz/ethpapers.eth
 
///

I. Money Games
Most people get into crypto for the money. Either to get rich, or as a protest against the current system.

Getting rich is relative. Rich to a poor person is freedom from needing to worry about money. Freedom from the weight of bills and rent hanging over your neck, and the necks of your family. We all have our problems and money doesn’t solve everything, but there is a kind of relief that can only be experienced when you cross the line from have-not to have.

And a protest is a deeply personal act. Even if we are against the same thing, we have our own motivations and reasons for why we are against it. I am against the idea of everyone being forced to play an unfair game. This game has sucked in the whole world with nowhere left to run and nowhere left to hide. Some people start out with huge advantages. Some people have the power to change the rules. Points get created out of thin air. This game causes unnecessary pain. Those are my reasons. You probably have your own.

But a new technology opens a new path. Many people have already had a taste of being early on some new coin or token or NFT. Or creating a platform, a community, a piece of art that both lives in an alternate system and is worth real, tangible, freedom-giving money. This temporary glitch in the Matrix has appeared to more and more people who never expected to see it. Normal people, poor people, have not only seen the freedom that lies on the other side, they’ve also seen the current game for what is really is.

Ethereum makes it obvious that anything can be money. We will disagree on the price depending on the day and mood of the market. But within a short span of time, coders, nerds, traders, and regular people created a new type of money out of consensus and math. A different money game exposes the current one as absurd because they are both absurd.

Ethereum’s existence chips away and subverts the seriousness of money as it exists today. And at the very same time, it is building an alternative economic structure. One that is described with many different properties, most of which have become VC buzzwords. But what I see is a system that aims to be fair. It is a populist technology. The commoner should be able to use it, verify its truth, and contribute to its resilience. This was always the most important and interesting thing about Ethereum, and Bitcoin before that. Ethereum is an ideal, like democracy, that aims to achieve the difficult balance between freedom and fairness.

If the Toni Morrison quote is true; if “the function of freedom is to free someone else”, then Ethereum is a means to realize that function at internet scale. It lets us break the stranglehold of money by first giving us small pockets of air.

In the 1600s, Manhattan was traded for $24 worth of goods including beads and trinkets. Adjusted for inflation, that’s about $1000 in today’s money. This trade was the genesis, the starting point, of the modern world’s financial center. There are other anecdotes like these, uglier and bloodier stories about how the origin of wealth comes from genocide, slavery, and theft. So how is the wealth derived from these origins any better or more legitimate than people getting rich from Bitcoin, or dog coins, or GameStop?

I can respect the hustler. I can respect the innovator. But I have no respect for the inheritor of wealth, the one born with extra points that were in some way passed on from someone who got lucky from being early. The digital money that has its origins in nerds and coders is far from perfect, but is more just, more fair, and cleaner than money inherited from the old world.

Money is something valuable that other people want to own. It is usually represented with numbers. The numbers make it seem objective and scientific like a kind of hard reality. But it’s not. It’s entirely contextual. In other words, how the game is played depends on how the rules and points are defined. And if we can all understand the most basic and simplistic concepts of money, then we will all be better equipped to decide what paths to take and which games to play.

Switching out the parameters changes the game but leaves a root truth intact: money represents scarcity. We evolved in a world of scarcity and still live on a planet with limited resources, so we value what is difficult to obtain and we value what other people want. That will never change. We will always value scarcity even if it looks very different between eras. Even in the digital world, we recreate scarcity in the form of attention (likes and views), authority and status (blue checkmarks), or simply limiting the numbers of available units (BTC, ETH, NFTs, etc).

Open public blockchains like Ethereum show people what money is made of – the guts and bones of it. Money is not that serious. It’s made-up points for a made-up game. The difference now is we can see the rules more clearly. The price, the money itself, it’s all an agreement we have with each other. If enough people see the value in it, we can come up with a new agreement. We can create and play new games.

“Evil is not the inclusion of finite games in an infinite game, but the restriction of all play to one or another finite game.” - James P. Carse

Money is useful. It’s an easy way to compare different things. You can go to any market in the world and get yourself a meal if you and the seller agree on the price. Money helps people who wouldn’t normally trust each or have any way of communicating share an understanding of what is valuable. This can be done with trade, barter, or debt, but money makes the transaction smoother because no other relationship or shared understanding is needed. It’s a common language and just like language, it’s largely arbitrary. Also, like language, it has profound effects on how we see and behave in the world.

The current money game has legitimate qualities. It created an environment for order, stability, and prosperity after the chaos of World War II. Games of politics, money, and even sports give humans an outlet for war. Competing over made-up points releases the tension that can build up when different tribes of apes come into conflict with each other. If a game is simply an interaction between two or more players, then the most brutal game is war. There needs to be no shared understanding or agreement in war. The only objective is to take. Take resources and take lives by inflicting damage and suffering on your opponents. War is the game with the highest stakes. And money can act as a hedge against violence.

But this usefulness is not permanent. If this system starts to cause more pain than it prevents. If this system starts to require more and more violence in order to be maintained, then we owe it to ourselves and our children to try something else.

Money is a story we all have to agree on. And for most of us, this story is no longer working. We have a new machine that lets us agree on new stories including what counts as money. This machine uses a type of math that was once classified as a munition, a weapon. This math was a threat to national security and put under strict export control so it couldn’t fall into enemy hands. This math, cryptography, serves as the backbone of cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum. And this is the structure we are using to change the story of money.

Humans have used many types of money over the years. We’ve played many different versions of the money game. Do you believe we’ve discovered the perfect one? The only one?


///

II. The Machine

Every system is a machine. A set of rules and moving parts meant to help people. But there are times when the machines we use become hopelessly outdated and ineffective. The economy, the financial system, these are machines – tools – meant to circulate money around and allow people to live richer lives. But if the machine keeps pushing all the money to the top or if it breaks like it did in 1929 or 2008 or whatever year the next major malfunction occurs, then we should have a backup plan. Repairs and upgrades may not be enough. A new machine may be needed.

The origin of Ethereum starts with Block 0. The “Genesis Block” was brought to life on Jul-30-2015 03:26:13 PM +UTC. The first function of this machine was to get everyone to agree on a basic unit of scarcity – Ether or ETH. The first recorded piece of history on Ethereum sent ETH to the 8,893 people who participated in the crowdfunding event where you had to send bitcoin (BTC) to participate. Ethereum was born out of Bitcoin in more ways than one. Because it was ownable and transferable, a price was put on it. A market was created. This basic unit of scarcity could flow and transform via middlemen, exchanges, and traders who could convert this new thing ETH to something else like BTC, and eventually dollars and other currencies, becoming tangible money. A new economic machine was born, although very basic.

These were exciting times. And I was there for it. One of those 8,893 addresses belonged to me, and even though the earnings from that early investment have long been squandered, the idealism remains. Whether we felt Ethereum was a way to make the world more globally collected, or less authoritarian, or freer, there was a sense that something new was being created, something truly different.

Ethereum is an alternative economic machine capable of moving vast amounts of wealth, reliably and securely. But underneath that is something bigger; a virtual machine, a world computer for our digital age, a shared source of truth, software and cryptography that basically says, any change in the state of Ethereum must follow the math we all agree to use and since no one controls math, no one can control the truth.

Hope was in the air, and since money was involved, greed and impatience also permeated. People were eager to do more with their new toy, so the free market gave us “The DAO”. Not a version of a “Decentralized Autonomous Organization” but THE version of a piece of software could not be controlled. The DAO operated on a simple rule of taking in ETH, investing it, and returning more ETH. A money-making robot. It was exciting times until a hacker exploited a bug in the code and took all the money – a full 14% of all the ETH in circulation in the very early days of Ethereum’s existence. It was a catastrophic violation that could only be remedied by another violation – bending the rules of the protocol by rolling back the code. A change in the software that made it so the DAO Hack never happened and no one lost or gained any money because of it. It was a change in the timeline. A hard fork.

How could you change an immutable, source of truth like a blockchain? This is where social consensus comes in. The software doesn’t feel anything, it just runs as programmed and when enough of the people running the software switched to an alternative version with an alternative set of events, things went on as if the DAO hack never happened.

The event lived on in another timeline called Ethereum Classic where the DAO hack happened exactly as it did in the memory of those who lived through it. The Ethereum Classic version of events rejected the hard fork and branched off with an alternative set of events and its own native asset called ETC.

The people who ran the Ethereum software agreed on a version of events that would allow the very nascent protocol to escape a life-threatening injury while the people who ran the Ethereum Classic software agreed on the version of events that was truer to the rules of the protocol.

On Ethereum, the truth is a combination of hard mathematical logic and soft social consensus, something we must agree on AND prove using an objective set of logic. The DAO fork taught us that underneath the money, math, and logic, everything depends on the agreement machine.

The promise machine
If two people agree on the price of a cow, then you have a trade. If two people agree on terms for borrowing that cow, then you have a loan. If many people agree that trades and loans can be done using metal coins or pieces of paper or numbers on a computer, then you have money. Once you have a way to agree on the rules and points, then money can be anything.

At the genesis block, Ethereum was very simple. You could only send ETH between accounts. But Ethereum also had smart contracts, which can be thought of as promises that must be kept no matter what. These promises are written in code so could be very complex. The DAO was a smart contract. It showed how powerfully binding this type of promise could be because even when the smart contract threatened the underlying protocol, it could not be undone by its creators alone. Only an embarrassing and controversial, and socially coordinated hard fork could remedy the situation.

Borrowing is at least a 5000-year-old human tradition. Borrowing creates credit, which expands the money supply and generates new activity, and ideally unlocks some innovations or discoveries to increase productivity – letting us do more work with less effort. Even if the benefits are temporary or cyclical, any respectable economic machine needs to have the capacity to create credit.

Since loans are just promises, smart contracts should be able to create borrowing and lending on Ethereum.

When most people on the planet think about money, they don’t think of something like ETH. Regular people spend money on everyday items, put it in the bank, and expect the value to not change very much. ETH is not any of these things so in 2017 a system of smart contracts was created called MakerDAO. It took in ETH and created a new token called SAI (now called DAI). SAI was stable and was meant to always be worth a dollar. The SAI smart contract promised that 1 SAI = 1 USD. SAI was a stablecoin.

Once the smart contracts were live, anyone could interact with it by depositing ETH and borrowing SAI. The contract would keep your ETH until you repaid the SAI you borrowed. And if the price of ETH went up, you could borrow more. But if the price of ETH dropped too far, then the smart contract would automatically sell some of your ETH and repay your loan for you.

You promised to never borrow more SAI than the value of your ETH allowed, and SAI promised to always stay pegged to the dollar. When either promise was broken, then the contract would sell assets, without any room for argument or arbitration, in order to make things right.

It is a kind of promise that could not be broken by you or the team that developed the code or the MakerDAO organization. It’s fundamentally different than promises of the past such as land treaties made with the indigenous peoples of the Americas. If a contract or treaty was written up that promised a piece of land to a certain tribe of indigenous people, the only binding force was the integrity and good will of the people holding the most power. If one party possessed overwhelming violent force, then they could break the promise unilaterally.

Breaking MakerDAO’s contract would be like changing the DAO. It would require a controversial hard fork that requires at least a majority of the network to switch to a different version of the software, altering the timeline of events and likely creating an alternative history in the process. Unlike the tiny community that accepted the DAO hardfork, the Ethereum ecosystem now consists of millions of people who hold ETH, run the Ethereum software, or use the protocol in some way. This modern group of stakeholders is much more distributed than in the early days. And each new person who joins increases not only the number, but also the diversity of the group, which increases the network’s ability to defend the integrity of its promises.

There are a lot of scams on Ethereum. Anything new with money will have conmen and there is no shortage of scam artists in crypto. So, you can’t trust most things on Ethereum, but you can trust the logic underneath simply because no one controls math. The rules are fair. They apply equally to everyone.

Math and consensus are difficult things to manipulate, and this machine uses that fact to bind people together into promises that must be kept. You can trust that if a promise – a treaty – is written well, it cannot be broken in the same ways that treaties have been broken in the past. You would have to force or threaten millions of people to not run a computer program. They must agree to ignore or reject a version of the truth. And if only a few people continue to run the rebel software, then that thread of truth will live on.


///

III. New Millennium Homes

You, your local government, and your book club now have the ability to create digital scarcity, which means the option to experiment with money. Since money, or the lack of it, is at the root of many of our deepest and most persistent societal issues, this an option worth exploring.

Crypto is full of spectacular scams and failures. But crypto does not have a monopoly on failed money schemes. Nearly every man-made type of money – whether issued on paper or coins – has blown up with enough time. What really scares people about crypto is you now have the same power as the Kings, Emperors, and Company men of the past. And unlike these men of the past, this technology forces you to keep your promises via smart contracts.

Sam Altman, the guy behind the company behind ChatGPT, also runs another project called Worldcoin. The idea behind Worldcoin is to implement Universal Basic Income (UBI), which is the concept of giving free money to everyone. The person largely responsible for making the public believe in A.I. is, most likely, also working on a highly ambitious and truly global UBI program because it seems obvious that A.I. is going to replace a lot of jobs. Without jobs, even soul-crushingly boring or dead-end ones, most people will have an even harder time getting by in this economy. So UBI may very soon be necessary to keep people living within some basic level of dignity.

UBI requires that each person gets paid only once, but linking one account to one human is something Ethereum can’t solve on its own. The protocol lives in its own universe with no natural link to the outside world. But once you solve this “Proof of h\Humanity” issue, then you know that people can’t double dip on UBI. We can guarantee the money is going to one person and not ten bots.

Worldcoin’s approach to Proof of Humanity is to use shiny metal orbs to scan human eyeballs. Because your eye, specifically your iris, is more unique than your fingerprint, it is a reliable, and difficult to forge, sign of your human identity.

UBI becomes easy once you can guarantee everyone only gets paid once and each person is legitimately human. In other words, any organization can create new scarce assets on Ethereum and send it to any group of verified humans.

The Worldcoin project pays people using a new money created out of thin air called worldcoin (WLD). This coin is sent to everyone who has been verified as human by the metal orbs. The price fluctuates and the amount is not very high, but it is universal. Worldcoin runs on Ethereum so is globally accessible by default. The only exceptions at time of writing are people who can’t get physically close enough to an orb to get scanned, and US residents who are protected from receiving UBI by US regulations.

But unlike Worldcoin, governments don’t need to scan eyeballs as the starting requirement. Governments are good at identifying unique humans. Birth certificates, passports, driver’s licenses, social security numbers – and their non-U.S. equivalents – are old school ink and paper methods that are trusted by most the world’s population. Democracies need a registry of unique humans to run legitimate elections. And all governments need to know who to collect taxes from. Some governments do this job better than others so some forms of government identification are more trusted than others. But if you live in an environment with trusted, high-quality forms of identification, then it is possible and fairly simple to bring the benefits of the blockchain to the masses because the Proof of Humanity problems has already been solved.

This is where governments and trusted public institutions can fulfill a role they are uniquely qualified for: identifying unique humans and providing them with private keys.

Blockchains are built on the assumption that one piece of information is kept secret: the private key. Private keys take the form of a long string of numbers and letters that look something like this: 8da4ef21b864d2cc526dbdb2a120bd2874c36c9d0a1fb7f8c63d7f7a8b41de8f

Private keys can be thought of as the ultimate password on a blockchain. They let users control their accounts, allowing them to move assets and interact with programs and other users on the network. Private keys are also the source of public addresses, which are like mailboxes or accounts that let users receive tokens, NFTs, and yes, UBI. One private key can control many public addresses on Ethereum.

There needs to be a way to keep private keys safe and there should be a way for a person to get a new private key regardless of income level and technical knowledge. If you can get a driver’s license, you should be able to get a private key and corresponding public address to use on Ethereum. It may even be a good idea to have a basic test, similar a written driving test, before getting a government-issued private key so everyone is equipped with at least some fundamental understand of digital money and best practices.

This is all meant to give more people, more options. As we increasingly move our lives online, a public option with no profit motive for how we build our digital identities and interact with digital objects seems like a basic necessity.

We live in a world of monopoly money. One entity – the US government – has a monopoly on the world’s money supply. Ethereum creates options to change this fact. We already have many types of money created out of thin air: gift cards, reward points, video game currency, etc. How much this Monopoly money is worth depends on what type of game we want to play. Things like Bitcoin, Ethereum, and crypto in general take this to the next level by guaranteeing limits on the supply, and in the case of Ethereum, adding programmability to money.

Ethereum is like a giant box of Legos. Applications are built on an ever-growing assortment of smart contracts, which can be thought of as modular building blocks. Because the platform is neutral and permissionless, developers can come from anywhere, willing to invest precious time and energy knowing that their creations can’t be arbitrarily manipulated or taken away. Code is constantly being created, used, re-used, and battle-tested in a live system. These building blocks are free for anyone to investigate, audit, and copy-and-paste, including public institutions.

It is messy, but rugged and secure pieces have already been created and thoroughly tested with more being created every day. If we started a new set of Legos, it is highly likely that no one else would use it, and it is almost guaranteed to be much more fragile than what already exists in the public sphere. A closed-off system could never imitate an ecosystem, which becomes stronger and more robust as more people join, contribute, and test it. Even hacks are productive because every vulnerability discovered means one less loophole to exploit in the future.

Providing more money to more people is possible. We have a foundation to build on. We have materials to build with. What remains to be done is best captured by an FDR quote from 1932: "The country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it: If it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something."

Money is simply a story shared by a group of people. There must be common faith that the numbers they are passing around are either worth showing off, worth keeping, or worth trading for some other type of money. This story can quickly evaporate, but when it endures or the story spreads widely, it can become a powerful tool for creating leverage and getting resources into different hands. What Ethereum helps do is pass this tool around to more people.

It’s hard for us to think about money as anything other than the all-encompassing water we swim in, but there’s no physical law that defines money. So let’s think of money like books. There are many different types with many difference authors for all sorts of audiences. But it wasn’t always like this. Writing is a human invention and for most of its history, the power to read and write was limited to a few select people. Even as more people learned to read, their access was limited to books like the Bible. Now we have children’s books, comic books, novels, and whatever it is you’re reading now. The possibilities and options have exploded in a relatively short amount of time. The same could happen with money. We could have a multiverse of money. Custom currencies for distinct communities. We won’t know until we try.

The full effect of these options won’t be known until more people have access to the technology. Right now, users must be sophisticated enough to navigate an increasingly complex landscape of applications, protocols, networks, chains, layer 2s, etc. They not only must decide who to trust, what to use, and how to use it, but also where to even begin. A public option for Ethereum could provide a kind of trustworthy gateway – a safe first step – into the world of Ethereum and digital assets.

We have Amazon, large corporate bookstores, and independent bookshops, but we also have public libraries. And the public library for money is what is missing. Libraries are free services for anyone with an ID. They help people gain access to books. They fill a need that the market on its own would not provide, yet libraries enrich every community they inhabit. A library for money can do the same thing in spirit.

The first step is an ID system tied to an Ethereum account for each person. Then you would start filling the library with many different forms of money from different authors. And like a library, some books and authors would be allowed while others wouldn’t be. There would have to be a careful curation process. Eventually you would have many different types of money, all carefully validated, that could be accessed by the public. On top of this, there would be constant efforts to provide education and financial literacy about this quickly evolving world.

Many of the problems we face have been created by an economic system we have inherited and have had little power to change or escape. Blockchains give us the power to tinker with the rules governing how money is created and how it flows. We are in the middle of many different crises with many different causes that blockchains alone will not solve. But when the technology of blockchains becomes widely understood and accessible, then radical experiments involving money become possible, which might lead us to the methods we need.

The idea isn't to come up with a perfect solution that works for everyone. The idea is to create pathways to new options that did not exist before.

Epilogue: Disclaimers
Experimenting with money can have unintended consequences, but there are three ways to keep us from going too far off the rails:

Protect individual privacy

Make the system transparent

Use a Layer 2

Privacy

At the level of the user or individual, privacy must be preserved. As private keys are linked to people’s identities, financial histories, and control their funds, the responsible management of private keys, and general protection of privacy, is the most important responsibility of organizations managing private keys.

Transparency

At the level of the system itself – at the layer of its governing structure – there should be as much transparency as possible. Who has power and who leads can change drastically. No matter who is in charge or what their agenda is, transparency keeps public institutions auditable and accountable. The public should always be able to tell what is going on and this is especially important when money is involved.

Transparency is not for the purpose of surveillance over citizens, but accountability over the system itself. Transparency is for the powerful. Privacy is for the weak. Anyone in the world should be able to look at the code and be able to tell how it works. If you can’t read code, trusted engineers can translate the code to English. A.I. systems like ChatGPT make it increasingly easy to copy-and-paste code and ask for a translation in any language. The A.I. has no incentive to lie. And a truly transparent system has an incentive not to cheat because it will be caught.

Transparency can also mean more efficiency. Over time, bureaucratic systems tend to get more complex and difficult for people outside the system to navigate and reason about. The levers and control valves get rusty from neglect and misuse, or simply become outdated. Starting on a new foundation means a clean slate for the entire system, and if transparency is built-in, it becomes possible for everyone to follow along with how the system changes over time. It’s easier to fix things when we can clearly see what is happening.

Layer 2

Worldcoin is built as a Layer 2 on Ethereum. What is a Layer 2? It’s a smaller more customizable and controlled blockchain that sits on top of a bigger, more permissionless and neutral layer. Whereas a Layer 1 is accessible to anyone with an internet connection, a Layer 2 can be more permissioned with more control over who and what can come in or out. In other words, it’s more centralized. Unwanted users or programs can be blacklisted. Only high quality, approved programs could be allowed into the system through a transparent and democratic process. The control valve could be loosened or tightened depending on how the publics wants to balance safety and opportunity – access and protection.

The basic security and consensus properties of Ethereum Layer 1 are inherited by the Layer 2. The existing, battle-tested, and composable Layer 1 code – the Legos – can also be re-used. Since the Layer 2 is smaller and more localized, it would be faster for the user and cheaper to maintain overall. Fees could be subsidized or abstracted away. Privacy preserving features could be added as modular pieces.


///

IV. Ju$t

Feudal Japan used a class system based on a simple hierarchy. There were four classes: Warriors called Samurai at the very top and Merchants at the very bottom. In the middle were Farmers and Artisans (craftsmen).

Merchants were at the bottom because they were both the most despised and the most threatening to the established order. It was believed Merchants did not contribute real value to society. Their function as middlemen who allocated resources, bringing goods and services to where they were most needed, was not appreciated. This role was seen as parasitic; capable of playing both sides, extracting both profit and information from a privileged position, and ultimately capable of accumulating enough power to threaten the ruling class.

Today, the order is reversed. Merchants have gobbled up the other classes, and the only one that remains is the stubborn Warrior. The modern-day Merchant is not the humble shopkeeper or curator of interesting provisions, but a profit-maximizing machine. An entity too big to compete with, creating products too addicting to give up, and always hungry for more. The modern-day Warrior is the artist, the activist, the scientist, the scholar and anyone else who follows an internalized code of honor from which they derive their actions and behaviors. Samurai called their code bushido. And Orwell provides a fitting description for the class I am attempting to describe as “the minority of gifted, willful people who are determined to live their own lives to the end…”

In the modern world, Warriors are forced to play money games – Squid Games where nothing is sacred – games they are poorly suited to play because they are more committed to their code, and their story, than they are to the money. Merchants have an easier time following the money. Both ideas are made-up. Both are powerful sources of motivation.

I’m not advocating for a return to a feudal system with violent warlords at the very top. I advocate for more options. It is not necessary for profit-maximizers to have the most power and influence in society. There are other ways we can organize ourselves.

Here, Ethereum offers a solution: to replace nearly all middlemen with fair, transparent rules. Protocols can sit in the middle of interactions, extracting profits when called on and distributing those profits exactly as programmed. Corporations can be dismantled by replacing each of their functions piece by piece. If it is, once again, time for society to be rebalanced and for the order to be rearranged, Ethereum has the power to build it in a new way.

Replacing middlemen
Entire classes of smaller merchants have already been outcompeted by the faster, more efficient, and yes more useful Amazon. And the world’s largest modern merchant already uses machines and code to replace human laborers. Clicking a button to complete our order sets off a chain of events in which many functions are fulfilled without human intervention: money is transferred, confirmations are sent, labels are printed, a robot is sent from its charging bay to the part of the warehouse where your item is waiting to be picked up. It’s fair game to take this automation further.

Ethereum is all about creating powerful little rules. Not all functions make sense to move to a blockchain, but rules or contracts involving money are some of the most obvious to start with because money moves between parties who want to trust each other.

The function of middlemen can be pushed into a box via smart contracts aka the code on Ethereum. Take for example, the Uniswap protocol. Known as a decentralized exchange, Uniswap is a set of smart contracts that automatically performs trades on behalf of the user. If you have ETH and I have USDC and we both agree on the price, then the Uniswap code lets us swap using a cold set of logic. There is no backdoor for swindlers to dip their fingers in.

FTX took the opposite approach. FTX was a centralized exchange, which meant between the time you deposit and withdraw your money from their system, human decisions makers ultimately decided what to do with your money. Since these middlemen sit in a special position, they must be trusted to keep people’s money safe and perform their duties as expected. People who choose Uniswap don’t have to worry about this because the code in the middle can only do a few simple functions. In other words, the code doesn’t know how to steal or “temporarily borrow” the money. There is still risk. The risk just moves away from the middleman as a fallible human, and toward the logic and setup of the rules that replace the middleman.

The Wikipedia article about secure multi-party computation (MPC), a privacy-preserving cryptographic technique, introduces a nice way to think about what cryptographic protocols do in general. Think about the protocol as a person you can trust. So instead of thinking about a decentralized exchange like Uniswap as an incomprehensible set of zeroes and ones, think of it as a person. Let’s call this person Sam Bankman-Fried. You can trust Sam to do his job because deep down he is made of logic that can’t break the rules of math. When both you and I agree on a price for a trade, we give our money to Sam who swaps the assets for us. That’s it. Sam always does his job reliably. He is incorruptible. He’s like a vending machine that just sits there until called on to do his duties.

These types of protocols can replace many other functions, not just trading. You trust (or don’t trust) a government to count your votes correctly? A protocol could do this. You trust (or don’t trust) a company to keep your data private? A protocol could do this. Exactly how it is all done and where the humans come in or don’t come in are questions we are just beginning to ponder. If every contract has loopholes, then much of the human work that remains will be about minimizing these loopholes. We are trying to create ever more perfect laws. And since these are public protocols, they require public sentiment to truly be legitimate. Setting up these protocols is like setting up new micro-constitutions. Once set up, they will be difficult to change. But if enough people believe in them and they are robust and useful enough, then we will have created enduring economic and social structures that we can keep building upon.

Ethereum can be just as good at replacing bureaucrats as it is at replacing middlemen. By shrinking the role of people in enforcing the rules, we can free up our collective energy for creating better rules, thinking and designing the machines instead of being expected to function like one.

The Warrior and the Merchant
There is a concept of leadership as being either transactional or transformational. Transactional leadership is about offering trades, bargains, and deals to appeal to people’s self-interest. Transformational leadership is about inspiring people to act for something bigger than themselves: an ideal like a culture, a community, a sense of justice. The Merchant is more transactional. The Warrior, more transformational.

Ethereum is more idealistic and transformational in spirit than its transactional surface would make things appear. I have spent a lot of time grappling with the idea of why Ethereum matters, if it matters at all, and why it is all so hard to explain. And something I’ve now arrived at is many of the most interesting concepts it presents seem paradoxical. One paradox finally made sense when I read this next quote from historian Doris Kearns Goodwin who was writing about another person who lived in times of tremendous change to the established social worder. She explained that “for Lincoln, pragmatic, transactional strategies provided the nuts and bolts of principled, transformational leadership.”

Ethereum is absurdly transactional, everything is for the Merchant. It has the power to turn our entire world into a series of trades. At the same time, Ethereum is profoundly transformational. It allows us to collectively rewrite the rules, in any way we want. It lets us build new worlds, piece-by-piece, with the idealism of a Warrior.



